## Defining and Using Classes 

All code in Java must be part of a class (or something similar).
Most code is written inside of methods.

```
public class Dog {
	public static void makeNoise() {
		System.out.println("Bark!");
	}
}
```
- you cannot just simply run the dog class, that will return an error message
- the dog class that we have defined does not do anything
	- it only defines what the `Dog` is able to do
- to run the class, we must either:
	- add a main method to the `Dog` class
*or*
	- create a separate `DogLauncher` class that runs methods from the `Dog` class

```
public class DogLauncher {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Dog.makeNoise();
	}
}
```

- a class that uses another class is sometimes called a "client" of that class
	- `DogLauncher` is a client of the `Dog` class


## Instance Variables and Object Instantiation

- classes can be instantiated
	- instances can hold data
- we can create multiple instances of one class
	- with every instance we can make the behavior of that class specific to our needs

``` 
public class Dog {
	public int weightInPounds;

	public void makeNoise() {
		if (weightInPounds < 10) {
			System.out.println("yipyipyip!");
		} else if (weightInPounds < 30) {
			System.out.println("bark. bark.");
		} else {
			System.out.println("woof!");
		}
	}
}
```

```
public class DogLauncher {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Dog d;
		d = new Dog();
		d.weightInPounds = 20;
		d.makeNoise();
	}
}
```

- when run, this program will create a `Dog` with a weight of 20 and this `Dog` will return "bark. bark."

Some key observations and terminology:

-   An `Object` in Java is an instance of any class.
-   The `Dog` class has its own variables, also known as _instance variables_ or _non-static variables_. 
-   The method that we created in the `Dog` class did not have the `static` keyword. We call such methods _instance methods_ or _non-static methods_.
-   To call the `makeNoise` method, we had to first _instantiate_ a `Dog` using the `new` keyword, and then make a specific `Dog` bark. In other words, we called `d.makeNoise()` instead of `Dog.makeNoise()`.
-   Once an object has been instantiated, it can be _assigned_ to a _declared_ variable of the appropriate type, e.g. `d = new Dog();`
-   Variables and methods of a class are also called _members_ of a class.
-   Members of a class are accessed using _dot notation_.


## Constructors in Java 

We usually construct objects in object oriented languages using a _constructor_:

```
public class DogLauncher {
	plastic static void main(String[] args) {
		Dog d = new Dog(20);
		d.makeNoise();
	}
}
```
- here, instantiation is parameterized
	- saves the time and messiness of tying out potentially many instance variable assignments
	- to enable such syntax, we need to only add a "constructor" to our Dog class:

```
public class Dog {
	public int weightInPounds;

	public Dog(int w) {
		weightInPounds = w;
	}

	public void makeNoise() {
		if (weightInPounds < 10) {
			System.out.println("yipyipyip!");
		} else if (weightInPounds < 30) {
			System.out.println("bark. bark.");
		} else {
			System.out.println("woof!");
		}
	}
}
```

- the constructor signature `public Dog(int w)` will be invoked anytime that we try to create a `Dog` using the `new` keyword and a single integer parameter.

## Array Instantiation, Arrays of Objects

arrays are instantiated in Java using the `new` keyword
```
public class ArrayDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        /* Create an array of five integers. */
        int[] someArray = new int[5];
        someArray[0] = 3;
        someArray[1] = 4;
    }
}
```

Similarly, we can create arrays of instantiated objects in Java, e.g.

```
public class DogArrayDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        /* Create an array of two dogs. */
        Dog[] dogs = new Dog[2];
        dogs[0] = new Dog(8);
        dogs[1] = new Dog(20);

        /* Yipping will result, since dogs[0] has weight 8. */
        dogs[0].makeNoise();
    }
}
```

Observe that new is used in two different ways: 
- Once to create an array that can hold two `Dog` objects, 
- and twice to create each actual `Dog`.

## Class Methods vs. Instance Methods 

Java allows us to define two types of methods:
- class methods / static methods
- instance methods / non-static methods

- instance methods are actions that can be taken only by a specific instance of a class
- static methods are actions that are taken by the class itself

example of a static method
- the `Math` class provides a `sqrt` method
	- because it is static, we can call it like this:
`x = Math.sqrt(100);`

- if `sqrt` had been an instance method, we would have the awkward syntax below:
```
Math m = new Math();
x = m.sqrt(100);
```

sometimes it makes sense to have a class with both instance and static methods
for example, suppose we want the ability to compare two dogs

one way to do this is to add a static method for comparing dogs
```
public static Dog maxDog(Dog d1, Dog d2) {
    if (d1.weightInPounds > d2.weightInPounds) {
        return d1;
    }
    return d2;
}
```
this method can be invoked by, for example:
```
Dog d = new Dog(15);
Dog d2 = new Dog(100);
Dog.maxDog(d, d2);
```

Observe that we've invoked using the class name, since this method is a static method.

We could also have implemented `maxDog` as a non-static method, e.g.

```
public Dog maxDog(Dog d2) {
    if (this.weightInPounds > d2.weightInPounds) {
        return this;
    }
    return d2;
}
```

Above, we use the keyword `this` to refer to the current object. This method could be invoked, for example, with:

```
Dog d = new Dog(15);
Dog d2 = new Dog(100);
d.maxDog(d2);
```

Here, we invoke the method using a specific instance variable.


## Static Variables

it is sometime useful for classes to have static variables
- these are properties inherent to the class itself, rather than the instance
- For example, we might record that the scientific name (or binomen) for Dogs is "Canis familiaris":
```
public class Dog {
    public int weightInPounds;
    public static String binomen = "Canis familiaris";
    ...
}
```
Static variables should be accessed using the name of the class rather than a specific instance, e.g. you should use `Dog.binomen`, not `d.binomen`.

With what we've learned so far, it's time to demystify the declaration we've been using for the main method. Breaking it into pieces, we have:

-   `public`: So far, all of our methods start with this keyword.
-   `static`: It is a static method, not associated with any particular instance.
-   `void`: It has no return type.
-   `main`: This is the name of the method.
-   `String[] args`: This is a parameter that is passed to the main method.

## Command Line Arguments

Since main is called by the Java interpreter itself rather than another Java class, it is the interpreter's job to supply these arguments. They refer usually to the command line arguments. For example, consider the program `ArgsDemo` below:

```
public class ArgsDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(args[0]);
    }
}
```

This program prints out the 0th command line argument, e.g.

```
$ java ArgsDemo these are command line arguments
these
```

In the example above, `args` will be an array of Strings, where the entries are {"these", "are", "command", "line", "arguments"}.